---
layout: post
title:  A Brief Primer On Efficient Rendering Algorithms & Clustered Shading.
date:   2018-12-02 23:13:40
description: Introducing the background and concepts needed to understand the subject and taxonomy of efficient shading algorithms.
---

For the past three months I've been fully immersed in the world of computer graphics by working full-time on a 3D renderer built with OpenGL. I'm pretty happy with how it's coming along so far and although there's still a handful of features I'd like to include, I finally feel comfortable enough with the final result to share with the world in its current semi-presentable state. I've uploaded it to GitHub and you can [check it out here](https://github.com/Angelo1211/HybridRenderingEngine). It is currently only available on Windows platforms, but who knows, I might get it to work on Linux at some point soon, fingers crossed.

It comes with all the familiar bells and whistles you've probably come to expect from the multitude of hobby renderers out there: shadow mapping, MSAA, normal mapping - you name it, if it has an online tutorial it's probably in there. However, among the sea of entry level features there's one in particular that I feel is not, so to speak, "stock", and of which I'm proud enough to have convinced myself that it is worthy of its own post. I'm of course talking about my own personal implementation of **Clustered shading**. An algorithm I first encountered in [this article by Adrian Courreges on DOOM 2016](http://www.adriancourreges.com/blog/2016/09/09/doom-2016-graphics-study/) which, if you haven't already read, I highly recommend you do before continuing, since it's simply a fascinating read, with great content and a slick presentation full of animations that are the envy of all graphics programming blogs out there. 

I read it not too long ago, when I was halfway done building my renderer &mdash; although at the time I would have told you I was 80% done &mdash; and at a point where I felt pretty great about myself. I had finally left the dark, dark, hopeless pit that is getting a "correct" shadow mapping implementation working, and it certainly felt like all was going to be smooth sailing from now on. Maybe that's why my first thoughts when I read the section on Clustered shading were something along the lines of: "hmm, this seems pretty neat! I wonder how hard it REALLY could be to implement? I mean, it's kind of like culling but with some extra steps and all done on the GPU. I know how to write regular shaders, compute shaders can't be so different! Shouldn't take too long."

Three weeks, [12 articles](https://github.com/Angelo1211/HybridRenderingEngine/wiki/References#11-shading-algorithm-overviews), 3 papers[[1]](http://www.cse.chalmers.se/~uffe/clustered_shading_preprint.pdf)[[2]](https://takahiroharada.files.wordpress.com/2015/04/forward_plus.pdf)[[3]](http://www.cse.chalmers.se/~uffe/ClusteredWithShadows.pdf) and [one](http://15418.courses.cs.cmu.edu/tsinghua2017/) and a [half](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F620ommtjqk&list=PLGvfHSgImk4aweyWlhBXNF6XISY3um82_) online courses later I can confirm, yep, it's still not as bad as shadow mapping.

### **TL;DR**
---
<p></p>
> *Cluster shading is an efficient and versatile rendering algorithm capable of unified lighting for both forward and deferred shading systems. It divides the view frustum into a 3D grid of blocks or "clusters" and quickly computes a list of lights intersecting each active volume.*

---
*You can fit this in a tweet!*

So let's get to it! I'll start by summarizing Clustered shading and briefly covering all the concepts that you need to be familiar with to implement this technique. Feel free to skip a section if you're already comfortable with its subject!

<br/>

### **Table of Contents**
---
<p></p>
*  Efficient Rendering Algorithms
    * BkahjJ

*  Clustered Deferred/Forward Shading

---
<p></p>
# ***Part 1:***
<p></p>
## Efficient Rendering Algorithms
<p></p>
---
*...versatile **rendering algorithm** capable...*
*...an **efficient** and...*
*...a **list of lights** intersecting...*
*...both **forward and deferred shading systems**...*
*...the **view frustum** into a 3D grid ...*

Clustered shading belongs to a family of rendering algorithms known as **Efficient Shading Algorithms.** This category refers to rendering methods that improve upon the classical Forward rendering implementation and include: Deferred rendering, Tiled forward/deferred( AKA Forward+ ) and of course Clustered shading. 

### **Forward Shading Review**
stuf
<script>
    $( document ).ready( function(){
        var cw = $('#forward1').width() * 0.80 ;
        $('#forward1').css({'height':cw  +'px'});
        $('#overdraw1').css({'height':cw  +'px'});
        $('#zpre1').css({'height':cw  +'px'});
        $('#def1').css({'height':cw  +'px'});
        $('#tiled1').css({'height':cw  +'px'});
        $('#depthDisc1').css({'height':cw * 2.1  +'px'});
        $('#clus1').css({'height':(cw * 2.1) +'px'});
        $('#zslice1').css({'height':cw  +'px'});
    });
</script>
 
<iframe id="forward1" class ="slideshow-iframe" src="{{ site.baseurl }}/slides/forward.html" style = "width: 100%;" frameborder="0" scrolling="no"  ></iframe>
asdf
``` c#
for object in scene
    if object.isVisible()
        for light in scene
            object.shade(light)
```


The pseudocode above could be found inside a naïve **multi-pass** classical Forward renderer. This approach is quite simple and elegant and would probably fair fine for scenes with few objects, simple materials and a couple of lights. Yet, rendering costs start to climb fast if you increase the quantity or complexity of any of these components. For example, if you have hundreds of ligths, shading for each object will incur a penalty due to the parsing of the list of lights and the overhead from repeated draw calls. And if that isn't bad enough, you'll find that eventually, even in scenes of apparent trivial complexity there will be objects that get in front of one another. This will cause something called **overdraw** which describes the phenomenon best understood by looking at an [episode of Bob Ross.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0FYfo94qefg) &mdash; this one's pretty good, it'll teach you about planar reflections! &mdash; Throughout the show Bob will paint these beautiful trees and mountains and then shortly after, proceed to paint right over them with a rock in the foreground. This is fine in oil paintings, where a frame rate of *0.0006fps* won't get you fired, but in Real-Time rendering we're aiming for, well, real-time frame rates in the range of 30fps to 60fps. 


<div>
 <iframe id="overdraw1" class ="slideshow-iframe" src="{{ site.baseurl }}/slides/overdraw.html" style = "width:100%" frameborder="0" scrolling="no"  ></iframe>
</div>

Overdraw is a specially egregious problem in Forward rendering since you might end up issuing thousands of pixels worth of fragment shader calls that end up being thrown away when an object closer to the viewer gets drawn right on top of them. So how do we fix this issue? Well, I didn't come up with the [original solution](https://sites.google.com/site/richgel99/home), but I'd like to think that I could of, and I believe so could you! So let's take a second and do a quick
exercise, go back and look at the pseudocode above. Given these two facts can you come up with an idea that would be the beginnings of Deferred Rendering and a simple solution to overdraw? 

* **Fact 1**: lighting is usually much more expensive to calculate than visibility.
* **Fact 2**: modern GPU's let us save and read data directly in the form of textures.

### **Deferred Shading Basics**

image...

So, the key insight I was looking for is that **there is no reason why you can't perform the visibility and shading steps separately**. The ideal case scenario is obviously one where you already know exactly what objects contribute to the final image and you only invoke the pixel shaders to shade whatever is visible of them. Sadly, there is no simple function that can determine ahead of time what objects will be displayed. &mdash;[Unless, of course, you literally are a modern age wizard and can write functions that output fully detailed scenes directly](https://www.shadertoy.com/view/ldd3DX) &mdash; Instead, what we can do is run through every object in the scene as we did earlier, except this time, not shading them. Instead we'll keep track of the last object 
that affected a pixel in some way, normally by either recording their depth or their position at that given pixel in a texture. We can summarize this in pseudocode like so:



<div>
<iframe id="zpre1" class ="slideshow-iframe" src="{{ site.baseurl }}/slides/zprepass.html" style = "width:100%" frameborder="0" scrolling="no"  ></iframe>
</div>




``` c#
texture depthTexture
for object in scene
    if object.isVisible() && (object.depth < depthTexture.depth)
       depthTexture.writeDepth(object)

for object in scene
    if object.depth == depthTexture.depth
        for light in scene
            object.shade(light)
```


This is usually known as a **Z-prepass**, and it essentially **decouples** the process of determining the visibility of an object from the act of shading it. This concept of decoupling is central to all efficient shading algorithms &mdash; some would claim that it also applies to efficient programs in general&mdash; and we'll see how each one approaches it in it's own unique way, including clustered shading, which we'll get to soon enough, I promise.  

**Deferred rendering**, extends the main concept of the **Z-prepass** even further by not only writing the depth or position of a given object to textures, but also recording all of the attributes of an object that are used in shading. That includes various things such as the surface normal, the objects' albedo/color or it's specular/shininess. There really is no limit to what you can write in textures beyond the texture memory of the GPU itself. The collection of these textures is commonly referred to as the **G-Buffer** and we'll use it for the lighting pass directly instead of referring to the source objects. Once again I have to plug [Adrian Courreges's Blog](http://www.adriancourreges.com/blog/2017/12/15/mgs-v-graphics-study/) where he goes into more detail about Deferred Rendering in his post about MGS V. Let's update our pseudocode algorithm to resemble a simple deferred implementation:


<div>
<iframe id="def1" class ="slideshow-iframe" src="{{ site.baseurl }}/slides/deferred.html" style = "width:100%" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" ></iframe>
</div>



``` c#
Gbuffer buffer
for object in scene
    if object.isVisible() && (object.depth < buffer.depth)
       buffer.writeShadingAttributes(object)

for light in scene
    buffer.shade(light)
```

Something worth noting is that both in a **Z-prepass** and in **Deferred rendering** you haven't actually eliminated overdraw, you've just smartly allowed for it to happen at a point where it doesn't affect performance as much. Because in the process of filling in the G-Buffer or your depth texture you'll still end up writing over them multiple times. However, this is *generally* not a problem anymore since the cost of accessing the shading attributes and rewriting memory is much cheaper than performing a full lighting pass. Pretty neat right?

Yet that does not mean memory access is cheap. In fact, if you were to go ahead and implement Deferred rendering as I've explained it so far, the performance gains would be pretty unremarkable, or in the case of large G-Buffers and many lights, performance would probably be worse. Even though you might have vanquished overdraw you have added a new cost to the shading & light accumulation step: reading the G-Buffer. Reading or writing memory in your tightest and most inner loop is always bad news, and even though GPU's have ways to hide the costs of memory reads, given enough lights, those latency hiding techniques will quickly become useless. If you're interested in understanding why [Prof. Fatahalian's course on Paralallel Computer architectures](http://15418.courses.cs.cmu.edu/tsinghua2017/lecture/basicarch) covers the modern Multi-core processor architecture, both for CPU's and GPU's, and explains memory latency and memory bandwidth in the best way I've found yet. 

> #### Small Detour: How slow are texture reads anyway?
> ---
> Texture reads are essentially memory reads and **reading memory is always slow**. How slow you ask? Well, there is no exact answer since it varies from architecture to architecture, but it is generally considered to be about ~200x slower than a register operation, which for the sake of argument let's assume takes ~0.5ns. A nanosecond is a **billionth** of a second, hardly a span of time we experience in our day to day lives. Let's scale it up a bit and imagine that register ops took about a minute instead. Say you're planning an evening with friends and invite them over to watch your favorite movie, The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the ring! (extended edition of course, clocking at about 3h20m). As soon as the movie starts you ask one of your friends (CPU) to go to the fridge(main memory) and grab you a drink(texture read), by the time he gets back the credits start rolling and the drink he's carrying is most definitely warm. 

Before moving on to the next section let's take a moment and repeat the same exercise we made at the end of the Forward Shading section. Look at our pseudocode above and ask yourself, given the fact below, are there are any other optimizations we could do that would help improve performance by reducing G-Buffer calls?

* **Fact 1**: Real light sources follow the inverse square law, which means that their brightness drops quickly as a function of distance, effectively to the point of being imperceptible. 

### **Tiled Shading & Forward+**
image...

This time, I wanted to get the gears turning and have you thinking about light, and about how it behaves in the context of distance. Thankfully, this is a very easy concept to grasp since we all experience it during our day to day activities. If you're reading this article there's a pretty high chance you're reading it on a desk. And resting on that desk &mdash; which I'm also willing to wager you should tidy up &mdash; there's probably a lamp who's only job is to shine on the writing
surface and its immediate surroundings. If you were tasked with defining how far the reach of your desk light was using the volume of a sphere centered at the light source, how far would it go? If the room you're in is pretty small, you'd probably say it lights the whole thing up, which if you have a pretty big light source might make sense, but if you have a dim light might make you scratch your heade. This is the result of indirect illumination which occurs when the light bounces of other
surfaces and makes those act like very dim light sources themselves, this is another fascinating topic know as [GLobal Illumination](https://www.scratchapixel.com/lessons/3d-basic-rendering/global-illumination-path-tracing/introduction-global-illumination-path-tracing) which could be the subject of whole books, so we'll have to leave it there for now. Essentially the core realization is that after a certain point we can't perceive the effects of a light source anymore, so we can change our
mental model of lights and effectively, **we can treat light as if it had a finite volume of influence**. This realization effectively allows us to perform "light collision detection" to identify what are the surfaces that actually get affected by the light and we shade only those. 

pseudocode of screen space bounds



<iframe id="tiled1" class ="slideshow-iframe" src="{{ site.baseurl }}/slides/tiled.html" style = "width:100%" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" ></iframe>


Show how there's a problem now if you check for each sphere interesection for each light, yes you'll be calling the pixel shader less, but you'll still be reading from the gbuffer each accumulation step and that is bad, can we do any better?

<iframe id="depthDisc1" class ="slideshow-iframe" src="{{ site.baseurl }}/slides/depthDisc.html" style = "width:100%" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" ></iframe>

Going back to the ideal case, ideally, you'd know what lights affect every pixel ahead of time. and instead of repatedly reading the gbuffer you'd read it only once and  but keeping a giant list of lights for each pixel might be redundant as well as not be desireable since each GPUthread would be evaluating different lights, screwing up consistency. If you wnat ot keep warp execution coherent it's better if oyu get it to be the size of a warp. explain gpu a bit more etc etc 



update pseudocode to use tiled 

remind that this method is also valid with forward and introduce forward + and say how you can use depth pre-pass to avoid overdraw ( which kind of muddies the waters as if it is really a forward method anymore or just a very thing gbuffer ) 

showcase the same thing but in forwaard


now introduce the idea that yes, we can now manage many lights but there are some problems with the fact thta we have used tiles to list lights, for one, if yu have large depth discontinuities oyu migth be including lights taht are further away from your point whcih you did not care about. Also any small movements might create a sudden change in the view direction that creates a jump in the depth discontinuity and now you're including lights from a mile away on your list of lilghts
stuff




Think as an exercise what we could do isntead

fact 1: we know the position and size of the volume of our view space at the beginning of every frame
fact 2: we also have set a near and far distance plane for our camera which encompasses the volume completely
fact 2: we haven't even gotten to clustered shading yet

### **Clustered Shading**


<iframe id="clus1" class ="slideshow-iframe" src="{{ site.baseurl }}/slides/clustered.html" style = "width:100%" frameborder="0" scrolling="no"></iframe>


It was first introduced by [Ola Olsson et al. in Clustered Deferred and Forward Shading](http://www.cse.chalmers.se/~uffe/clustered_shading_preprint.pdf)

The idea that I'm looking for here is to get you to start tthinking about the shape of the view frustum and how that could come in handy for tiled. Specifically that it is a 3D volume that we have subdivided into 2D tiles, but those 2D tiles have depth which make them mini frustums that are very elongated. So what if instead of having to do a z prepass givne that we already know the volume the camera will ahve we just subdivide that into small cube volumes and perform light
culling with that instead 

we have now obviated the need for a z prepass (although most likely you'll need it anyway) and created a list of light for each cluster considerally reducing the size and creating better view dependency

emphasized that the tiled/clustered forawrd deferred difference is because the algorithms are trying to tackle specific problems taht come from rendering in our basic model

notice the process we've followed by looking at the forward algorithm  and slowly building an intuition of what places would be a bottle neck and focused optimiaiton on that

It goes without saying &mdash;yet I will anyway&mdash; that these algorithms are only really worth implementing in projects where rendering is becoming a bottle neck and there are concerns about performance and maintaning a stable frame rate. There ain't no such thing as a free lunch, and there are side-effects to **all** of these algorithms that will add a constant overhead to the rendering process. It really might not be worth it until you are processing some hefty amount of data per frame, so make sure to consult your ~~[primary care phycisian](https://renderdoc.org/)~~ profiler tools to assess the location of your current bottleneck.  

give pros and cons table

Debate table a bit then

Now this has been a 1000ft overview of efficient rendering algorithms and the process to follow to discover it, as you can imagine there's a lot more to it than just this. (aT least three weeks worth of content) So you should check these sources out if you want to learn more about it and further your understsanding beyond usrface level stuff. Next we will move into describing clustered shading in more detail and describing some of the implementation steps I made in my engine and what
I've read about other engines


#### Further reading:

* [Rendering an Image of a 3D Scene by ScratchAPixel](https://www.scratchapixel.com/lessons/3d-basic-rendering/rendering-3d-scene-overview/computer-discrete-raster)
* [A Short Introduction to Computer Graphics by Fredo Durand](http://people.csail.mit.edu/fredo/Depiction/1_Introduction/reviewGraphics.pdf)
* [Clustered Forward vs Deferred Shading by Matias](http://www.yosoygames.com.ar/wp/2016/11/clustered-forward-vs-deferred-shading/)
* [Forward vs Deferred vs Forward+ by Jeremiah van Oosten](https://www.3dgep.com/forward-plus/)
* [The real-time rendering continuum by Angelo Pesce](http://c0de517e.blogspot.com/2016/08/the-real-time-rendering-continuum.html)
* [Chapter 20: Efficient Shading in Real Time Rendering 4th Edition](http://www.realtimerendering.com/)
* [Hiding Stalls with multi-threading by Prof. Kayvon Fatahalian](http://15418.courses.cs.cmu.edu/tsinghua2017/lecture/basicarch/slide_052)
* [Latency numbers every programmer should know by HellerBarde](https://gist.github.com/hellerbarde/2843375)
* [Deferred Shading Optimizations By Nicolas Thibieroz](http://twvideo01.ubm-us.net/o1/vault/gdc2011/slides/Nicolas_Thibieroz_Programming_Deferred_Shading_Optimizations.pps)
* [Forward+: Bringing deferred lighting to the next level by Takahiro Harada et al.](https://takahiroharada.files.wordpress.com/2015/04/forward_plus.pdf#page=2&zoom=100,0,78)


---
<p></p>
# ***Part 2:***
<p></p>
## Clustered Hybrid Shading
<p></p>
---
*...and **versatile** rendering ...*
*... and **quickly computes** a ...*
*...a **3D grid of blocks or "clusters"** and ...*
*...each **Active Volume**...*
*... capable of **unified lighting** for ...*

Explain what we're doing here, what the plan is and how we've subdividing the work based on the paper's explanation of it and my own implementation of the technique

### **Building the Cluster Grid**
<p></p>

Explain the data structure itself, how it is defined on the paper, then define it how you did it in terms of AABB boxes and all. 

Explain scatter vs gather or whatever that is  

Explain the basics of writing a compute shader, basically mental models that you need to have

Explain exponential slicing and explain the pros and cons

Shwo pseudocode



<iframe id="zslice1" class ="slideshow-iframe" src="{{ site.baseurl }}/slides/zslices.html" style = "width:100%" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" ></iframe>




Show the picture of the grids to show how it ends up looking from your point of view

Explain that you have to do this all on the gpu to be effective, since the whole point is that you just reduce transferring stuff abck and forth and it is way faster todo this in parallel


### **Efficient Light Culling**
<p></p>

Explain the light culling step how you performed it

show some pseudocode

explain the benefits again of culling thisway

explain that it is essentially a spatial grouping of lights


maybe cute animation of the ball entering the sphere and getting added to the list of lights

### **Advanced Optimization Techniques**
<p></p>

Explain that this is the more advanced stuff

that there is obviously still much to do and that there are always more optimizations that can be done

explain the normal one and the bvh oen very briefly and link to the van oosten link

also show van oosten video

explain why you would even want this many lights, what you could do with it

explain that you plan to implement something like this at a future time of your project since you're not too familiar but there are places you can go look at 

Explain you can even implement something for shadows like doom did or even use environment probes and decals in your cluster system



### **Successful Implementations**
<p></p>

So I would be remiss not to end this post by sharing some great presentations from other way more experienced devs where they discuss their own versions of Clustered shading. As you can imagine, no two of them are alike, both in the nitty-gritty details of their implementations and in the large scale differences found in the genres of the games they make. It speaks volumes of the flexibility of this algorithm and hints towards a future where hybrid forward/deferred engines are the norm for AAA products that demand the highest visual fidelity. 

Also, hey, I've technically implemented a Clustered Renderer too! If you've forgotten about it after reading this whole post I don't blame you, but [here's a link](https://github.com/Angelo1211/HybridRenderingEngine) for you so you don't have to scroll all the way to the top. It's a simplified implementation with much of the code commented so you &mdash; and me in about a year when I forget &mdash; can follow along easily. Okay okay, enough self promotion, here are the goods:

* [Clustered Shading in the Wild by Ola Olsson](http://efficientshading.com/blog/)
* [(Doom 2016)The devil is in the Details by Tiago Sousa and Jean Geffrey](https://www.slideshare.net/TiagoAlexSousa/siggraph2016-the-devil-is-in-the-details-idtech-666?next_slideshow=1)
* [Practical Clustered Shading by Emil Persson](http://www.humus.name/Articles/PracticalClusteredShading.pdf)
* [Clustered Forward Rendering and Anti-aliasing in 'Detroit: Become Human' by Ronan Marchalot](https://twvideo01.ubm-us.net/o1/vault/gdc2018/presentations/Marchalot_Ronan_ClusteredRenderingAnd.pdf)

#### Further reading:
* [Chapter 20: Efficient Shading in Real Time Rendering 4th Edition](http://www.realtimerendering.com/)
* [Volume Tiled Forward Shading by Jeremiah Van Oosten](https://www.3dgep.com/volume-tiled-forward-shading/)
* [Practical Clustered Shading By Emil Persson](http://newq.net/dl/pub/SA2014Practical.pdf)
* [Tiled and Clustered Forward Shading Supporting Transparency and MSAA Olsson et al.](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/254463291_Tiled_and_Clustered_Forward_Shading_Supporting_Transparency_and_MSAA)

---

*Psst, hey you! If you've gotten this far I'd like to thank you for taking the time to read this post. I hope you enjoyed reading it as much as I did writing it. Just letting you know that I'm currently looking for a Graphics related position. If you're interested or know of any opportunities, I'd appreciate it if you'd let me know. Feel free to check out my about page for a choice selection of social media where you can reach me!*

*Any questions? Dead links? Complaints to management? My email is angelo12@vt.edu but you can also find me on twitter at [@aortizelguero](https://twitter.com/aortizelguero).*


